DM-38014: Memo on the use of ANTARES for the Rubin/LSST AFS (#2)
lsst-dm/dmtn-261: DMTN-261.tex

\documentclass[DM,authoryear]{lsstdoc}
\input{meta}

% Package imports go here.

% Local commands go here.

\title{On the use of the CSDC ANTARES Broker for the Rubin/LSST Alert Filtering Service.}

% Memo on the provision of the Rubin/LSST Alert Filtering System by ANTARES
\author{V. Krabbendam, T. Matheson, R. Blum}

\setDocRef{DMTN-261}
\setDocUpstreamLocation{\url{https://github.com/lsst-dm/dmtn-261}}

\date{2024-06-21}

\begin{document}

\setMemoto{ L. Guy, E. Bellm, P. Marshall}
        
\mkmemotitle

During steady-state operations, Rubin Observatory's LSST will produce about ten million world public alerts of transients, variable, and moving objects. Science users will work with community alert
brokers to crossmatch, filter, and classify these alerts in order to identify the subset that require real-time followup observations. 
At the time the vision for this ambitious and comprehensive alert system was developed, no community alert brokers were functional.

> Accordingly, the Rubin project provided a fallback: a simple “alert filtering system” that the project would provide. 

Author: ```suggestion
Accordingly, the Rubin project provided a fallback: a simple “alert filtering system” (AFS). 
```

\input{meta}

% Package imports go here.

% Local commands go here.

\title{On the use of the CSDC ANTARES Broker for the Rubin/LSST Alert Filtering Service.}

% Memo on the provision of the Rubin/LSST Alert Filtering System by ANTARES
\author{V. Krabbendam, T. Matheson, R. Blum}

\setDocRef{DMTN-261}
\setDocUpstreamLocation{\url{https://github.com/lsst-dm/dmtn-261}}

\date{2024-06-21}

\begin{document}

\setMemoto{ L. Guy, E. Bellm, P. Marshall}
        
\mkmemotitle

During steady-state operations, Rubin Observatory's LSST will produce about ten million world public alerts of transients, variable, and moving objects. Science users will work with community alert
brokers to crossmatch, filter, and classify these alerts in order to identify the subset that require real-time followup observations. 
At the time the vision for this ambitious and comprehensive alert system was developed, no community alert brokers were functional.

Accordingly, the Rubin project provided a fallback: a simple “alert filtering system” that the project would provide. 
The AFS would allow Rubin data-rights holders to apply simple user-defined or predefined filters to the Rubin alert stream. 

> This minimized the risk that community alert brokers would not be available, or not provide the functionality required to fulfill users' needs.

Author: ```suggestion
This mitigated the risk that community alert brokers would not be available, or not provide the functionality required to fulfill users' needs.
```

Today, the situation is quite different. 
Seven community alert brokers have been approved for direct access to the full Rubin alert stream, with two more planning to operate downstream of a full-stream broker. 

> The brokers have mature systems and active user bases and are operating on live Zwicky Transient Facility alerts. 

Author: ```suggestion
 "Several of these brokers have mature systems and active user bases, and are operating on live Zwicky Transient Facility alerts."
```

>  "Several of these brokers have mature systems and active user bases, and are operating on live Zwicky Transient Facility alerts."

Author: ```suggestion
```

Several brokers have functionality which mirrors that planned for the Rubin AFS. 

> Nevertheless it is reasonable for the Rubin project to ensure that Rubin data-rights holders have access to AFS-like capabilities throughout the survey, even if that service is provided by another entity.

Author: ```suggestion
Nevertheless the Rubin project still plans to provide a basic, limited capacity alert filtering service that can take user defined filters to reduce the alert stream to manageable levels throughout the survey.
```

Author: "basic, limited capacity" is what is stated  in our requirements -- good to use the same terminology

Therefore Rubin Observatory commits to provide resources to enable the use of the Arizona-NOIRLab Temporal Analysis and Response to Events System (ANTARES),   \citep{2021AJ....161..107M} AFS for Rubin. 

> Rubin will work with CSDC to develop a detailed plan to commission the AFS following the technical description given in the  technical note \citeds{dmtn-226} 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rubin will work with CSDC to develop a detailed plan to commission the AFS following the technical description given in the  technical note \citeds{dmtn-226}. 
```

> It is expected the AFS will be commissioned along with the rest of the Rubin system. 

Author: The AFS  is currently a P2 requirement on DM.  I would prefer to move discussion of a timeline from this memo to [dmtn-226](https://dmtn-226.lsst.io/), which already has a section "timeline". The memo is meant to codify the agreement to collaborate.  I'd prefer to keep all implementation details, including timeline for delivery, in the technical note [DMTN-226](https://dmtn-226.lsst.io/)

Reviewer 2: ok

> As such, the AFS should be in place no later than October 1, 2025.

Author: The AFS  is currently a P2 requirement on DM.  I would prefer to move discussion of a timeline from this memo to [dmtn-226](https://dmtn-226.lsst.io/), which already has a section "timeline". The memo is meant to codify the agreement to collaborate.  I'd prefer to keep all implementation details, including timeline for delivery, in the technical note [DMTN-226](https://dmtn-226.lsst.io/)

Author: If we expect the AFS prior to the start of Operations, we need to adjust the DM requirement prioritization

Reviewer 2: I am ok with removing the timeline.
